Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Dr. Michael Hudson. He's a
return guest, and today we're talking about his book
Temples of Enterprise Creating Economic Order in the Bronze
Age Near East. So Doctor Hudson, welcome back to
the show. It's always a pleasure to talk
with you. Thanks for having me, Ricardo.
OK, so what do we know about the origins
of the economy in the ancient Near East, and
why did you get interested in the ancient Near
East specifically?
Well, there are two completely separate questions. Maybe I
ought to say why I got interested first, because
that shows you what I'm looking for. Uh, BEFORE
I, uh, began to read about the ancient Near
East around 1980. I'd worked for 20 years in
financial analysis of debt. And I'd been warning that
the debts of third world countries, the global South,
couldn't be paid. And then I was tracing how
the debt trends of the United States economy and
other economies in the end couldn't be paid. And
it was obvious for me that there was going
to have to be a debt write-down of global
South debts, especially of Latin America. And in 1979,
uh there was a UNITAR meeting. I was working
for the United Nations Institute for Training and Research.
And uh the meeting was basically on North-South relations,
and I explained, explained how there was no way
that Latin America could pay its existing debts and
there was going to have to be uh a
break in the chain of payments in a few
years. Well, there was a riot, literally a riot
at the meeting. The US rapporteur was, I think,
a government uh intelligence plot and uh misrepresented. My
statement to say, uh, Professor Hudson has just studied
debt and uh analyzes how it can be paid,
and I stood up and said that uh there's
no, I analyzed how it could not be paid,
now it could be paid, uh, and the very
forecast of saying how much was going to be
owed when you compare it to the earning power
of Latin America and other countries for exports and
uh remittances and all of their other balance of
payments. Uh, ESSENTIALLY couldn't be paid. Well, the controversy
over that. Uh, AND as you know, uh, 3
years later in 1982, Mexico started the whole Latin
American debt bond by, uh, defaulting on its teso
boos, it's uh short-term government debt. Well, I became,
uh, by 1980, uh, 1, interested in writing a
history of how societies had handled their inability to
pay debt. And I'd, um, in, in about two
years, 1982, 1983, I'd gone back through medieval Europe
and uh through the biblical times, and I'd found
references to Near Eastern uh anticipations of the Jubilee
year, uh, and debt writes down, writedowns, but I
couldn't really find very much of this, so I
uh took the sources that I could find from
Hammurabi's debt cancellations and others. And uh a friend
of mine who was a uh colleague at Harvard
brought me up to Harvard and they uh appointed
me a post, a fellow in Babylonian archaeology. So
I spent, uh, basically I changed positions from, or
changed my focus of studies from being an economist,
warning that debts couldn't be paid, and this was
in the 1980s when there was no chance at
all of people accepting this idea, uh, to study
archaeology and Assyriology. And uh finally, in 1994, uh,
we decided at Harvard to uh organize. An economic
history of the ancient Near East that uh uh
I, I found that the ancient Near East, Mesopotamia,
Egypt, the other Bronze Age societies in the 3rd
and 2nd and 1st millennium were so different from
today's world that economists had avoided looking at antiquity
because it seemed as if civilization Couldn't possibly have
started this way. This is not how Margaret Thatcher
and Milton Friedman would have started a civilization if
they would have gone back and advised that it
is, is how to develop. Uh, AND so we
uh began to write a history of uh uh
public-private relations, of land tenure, uh, and most of
all, money and debt. And so, uh, basically, uh
and that entailed, well, the origin of money was
in cost accounting by the temples, and the role
of money was not the way the Austrian right
wingers or the opponents of socialism had said money
is uh to settle barter, uh, we found that
Uh, uh, money was, uh, basically used to pay
debts, and that economists generally have not distinguished between
credit and money. Uh, DURING the crop year in
Mesopotamia, uh, all the way from the 3rd millennium
BC down to medieval Europe, uh, cultivators would, uh,
run into debt during, uh, the year for various
exchanges. Expenses, uh, in, in Babylonia, this included running
up a bill at the ale house, uh, for
ale, it would include hiring priests to officiate at
public ceremonies. Well, all these, uh, this exchange on
credit, uh, basically had to be settled at one
point of the year, at harvest time, when the
crop was in and it was weighed out on
the threshing floor. And uh that's when uh the,
the debts are denominated in grain for the agrarian
sector. Uh, I'll get, and uh silver for the
trade sector, uh, and so the money was for
paying these debts, and the denominations of money were
set in grain, uh, essentially we found by the
temples that had measured grain in terms of what
they had to distribute to the labor force. Uh,
THAT, uh, was employed mainly weaving textiles that were
consigned to private merchants to, uh, travel to Turkey,
to the, uh, to, to what is now Persia,
uh, various countries to obtain the metals and the
stone that wasn't available in Mesopotamians soils. And at
the time that I wrote, uh, there, there was
a, a general belief that, well, all of this
is fictitious. Not only did were the Judaic uh
uh jubilee not uh uh ever really enacted, it
was claimed, but all this uh Near Eastern debt
cancellations couldn't possibly have occurred the way uh they
occurred. Uh. Because there would have been a collapse.
Well, basically, here's the problem that Mesopotamia and all
the Near Eastern neighbors face. As I said, the
debts at the end of the year, you paid
in money by measuring out the crops on the
threshing floor. Well, what do you do when the
crops failed? What do you do if there was
a drought or a flood or a military disturbance?
Well, At that time, uh, you had a choice,
and the modern solution would be, well, if a
debt can't be paid, then the creditor gets to
uh reduce, to take the property of the debt.
And reduce them to debt bondage has occurred in
classical Greece and Rome and end up taking the
land in payment, uh, that's the sanctity of private
property is the sanctity of the creditor to deprive
debtors of their private property. This did not occur
in Mesopotamia anywhere, uh, uh, or on a permanent
basis. Obviously, if a a debtor had run up
a debt very often to a member of the
temple bureaucracy, he had to work it off, uh,
and that could be anywhere from, uh, giving him
the crop. To, uh, working on his land, to,
to harvest, to, uh, outright bondage, if, uh, the
creditor would pledge his wife or his daughter, uh,
as a, uh, house servant, uh, to the creditor.
Well, this, uh, was not, if that would have
happened on a very large scale, society couldn't have
taken off because very soon, Yeah, uh, what you
saw at the end of the Roman Empire, where
the whole, uh, economy was, uh, population was turned
into serfs, uh, and serfdom, uh, that would have
stifled their development right there because in the 3rd
millennium, 2nd millennium, the scarce labor, the scarce factor
of production in antiquity was labor. There was plenty
of land. Uh, THE problem is, how do you
irrigate it, how do you, uh, divide it and
allocate it? How do you give cities? So, uh,
this led me, you asked me what got me
interested into it, what got me interested, uh, in
was, uh, how, why debts were canceled, and that
led me to say, well, how did debts develop
and who canceled the debts and How was society
organized so that when you canceled debts, it was
resilient and grew instead of collapsing. That's uh the
big picture. Well, the, the rulers of, uh, every
ruler of Hammurabi's dynasty, we found out, the Sumerian
rulers before him and the other Near Eastern rulers
uh elsewhere in the Near East all the way
down to Egypt. Uh, PERIODICALLY, uh, canceled debts when
a new ruler took the throne. They would restore
order and, uh, they wanted to take, begin their
rule with an economy in, in good order, so
they would know all of the debts that had
been accumulated. They'd free the debt bond servants that
had been reduced to bondage, they'd return any land
that had been forfeited. Uh, THIS survived not only
in the Judaic Jubilee year of Leviticus 25, but
also in Europe into all the modern times when
kings of Poland or Central European countries would take
the kingship, they'd often free the prisoners. Uh, ESPECIALLY
because, uh, prisoners were put in by the preceding
king, uh, and, uh, that would be, I'm, I'm
going to rule in peace, let's all, uh, be,
uh, 11, happy, uh, community. Well, the reason that,
uh, Babylonian and Sumerian and other Near Eastern rulers
canceled the debts, uh, was if they didn't. The
population would have run away. Flight was a big
element of uh uh uh of recourse for populations
who are indebted, and if you did not cancel
the debts, if you did not guarantee everyone their
land, then you would uh find yourself either overthrown
or depopulated. Well, that led me uh and the
group into uh deciding, well, how, how, how do
we decide who got How much land. And we
found that already by the late Stone Age, apparently,
um you had communities expanding out and uh they
basically would Assign standardized plots of land to the
citizenry at large, and they, the size of the
land and the conditions of land tenure would be,
we're going to assign you this land, but in
exchange, you're going to have to, you owe the
community certain basic public services as the condition of
holding this land. Number one, you have to serve
in the army. Number 2, you have to work
on Corvet labor, that is infrastructure projects. Uh, YOU
might have locally, you might have to help dig
canals, uh, but, uh, you might have to build
walls around the cities so that Uh, nomads couldn't
attack you. You might help build temple foundations or
temples, or you might help build palaces. We have,
uh, the inscriptions that are buried in walls, uh,
explaining, you know, how these were done, and The
question is, well, uh, were land, how were landowners,
uh, the, the peasantry, as you would call them
today, um, did, did they accept all this? Well,
we found out, uh, largely from Egyptian records, uh,
from building the pyramids and other records that, uh,
the, these, uh, infrastructure projects, you have, uh, many
cylinder seals and In, uh, Babylonia, uh, and Sumer
about rulers carrying big baskets of, uh, dirt on
their head for excavating projects, uh, and you have,
and whole masses of citizens carrying things on their
heads. It was hard work doing construction labor. Nobody
likes doing it today, that's why it's left to
immigrants in America. Before they were expelled earlier in
the year. Uh, THEY, uh, er, but it turns
out that, uh, these were great socializing projects. For
one thing, we know that the government provided enormous
amounts of beer at these festivals. Uh, THEY fed
the people. Not only did they feed them beer,
but they had great feasts, and it was at
these feasts that The uh Near Easterners uh had
their major uh times of year when they ate
meat. Uh, NORMALLY the family would live on a
very healthy plant-based diet, but it wouldn't, wouldn't entail
meat. So, we found the whole organization of land
tenure. Uh, IT was taxes that created the definition
of and conditions of land tenure. And it was
the preservation of this land tenure that led rulers
to say, well, uh, we, uh, if, if the
crops fail and the cultivators cannot pay the creditors,
uh, we certainly don't want them to end up
as bond servants to the creditors because then They
couldn't serve in the army, and they'd be working
the creditors' land or in their houses, not on
building public projects. So, you had a kind of
bifurcated economy, you had the economy of the large
institutions, the palace and the temples on the one
hand, uh, and The uh agrarian sector uh uh
cultivators on the other, and the, uh, the agrarian
sector would provide labor, often war widows or war
orphans, to the temples or palaces to work in
the weaving workshops, and uh they'd produce, buy the
textiles, and uh these textiles. WERE turned into the
economic surplus of Mesopotamia and other countries by being
consigned to merchants, many of them private, some may
have worked also for the temples, we're not exactly
sure, and uh they'd be advanced to the traders,
and uh the traders would have to, uh, in,
in 5 years, they would have to return double
the amount of money. Uh, THAT was lent. Well,
that was the origin of interest rates. We found
out that interest rates did not reflect supply and
demand, but were standardized for century after century, for
over, over 1000 years, uh, and they were, the,
they were standardized for money that was, uh, transactions
that were done between the large institutions. And the
rest of the economy at large. The large institutions,
uh, because they were the institutions, uh, creating and
monetizing the economic surplus with foreign aid, kept their
accounts in silver. The uh agrarian economy was based
on the land and the crops and, and grain
because that's what was, what was grown. And in
order to make a balance sheet and an income
and expense statement of the temples, you needed to
consolidate foreign trade and uh domestic production and uh
so you had to buy monetary standard of Of,
uh, setting a unit of, uh, uh, grain is
equal to one shekel of silver, and, uh, this
fixed unit, uh, the exchange rate between grain and
silver was standardized again for uh the, the certainly
the duration of a king's reign and pretty much
over time, uh, but it only uh related to
transactions. Between the economy at large and the large
institutions. In other words, what gave money its value
was its acceptance by the large by the government,
by the palace, the palatial economy for payment of
Either taxes or debts or uh transactions with it,
just like modern monetary theory uh explains and uh
that uh we, we created this, this picture of
an economy, you, you couldn't call it a democracy
because nobody voted for the ruler, you couldn't call
it an oligarchy. Uh, BECAUSE the object of rulers
was to prevent a creditor oligarchy from evolving as
developed in, uh, uh, Greece and Rome in classical
times. Maybe you could call it agrarian socialism. Nobody's
figured out an acceptable term for it, but at
any rate, uh, uh, we, uh, we created, uh,
rewrote the Uh, I shouldn't say rewrote, we wrote
the first economic history of the ancient Near East
in the five, colloquium volumes that I edited between
1994 and I think, uh, 2008, and the Temples
of Enterprise, uh, uh book that uh led you
to have this, uh, discussion are the collected articles
that I wrote on this during these years, uh,
explaining how Interest rates originated, why they differed from
one, you know, from Mesopotamia to Greece and Rome,
how land was distributed, how money was used to
settle credit balances, why the temples created money instead
of private, just private individual merchants creating their own
pieces of silver for exchange. Well, that's my answer
to the question, and when you ask why did
you do something, it's like a, a lawyer is
told in, in court, never ask why, because it
means that the er er the person, you're the
witness can say whatever they want. And the judge
can't overrule it and say, well, you asked him
that, we won't, we won't exclude that. So you
ask me, maybe if you ask more specific questions
on the big picture that I described, we can
get more specific.
Yes, of course, we're going to break down many
of the things you said there. Let me ask
you specifically about the origins of money because I
think that's a very interesting topic also to explore
here because we very commonly hear from this sort
of Anti-government mythology, uh, people who have a take
on the origins of money based on barter without
that or public institutions playing a significant role. What
do you make of that kind of take?
What, what do I make of, of, of the
Austrian theory? Uh, THE whole idea of the Austrian
theory was, uh, to fight, uh, it was developed
in the late 19th century, uh, by Menger, and
the whole idea was they hated government. There was
a class war in Vienna, especially, they, there was
fighting in the street. Uh, THE uh, the, the
whole dynamic of industrial capitalism was to, uh, Uh,
have an increasing role of government in providing for,
uh, basic, uh, services and needs that otherwise would
be monopolized for, uh, transportation, for communications, and of
course for healthcare, education. All of these are provided
by government so that you would minimize the cost
that employees. HAD to pay for these, using these
services, which would have required the industrial capitalists to
pay higher wages, and if the government did not
subsidize these services, uh, including housing, that uh workers
uh needed to uh pay uh in order to
live, then the, uh, the, the, these industrialists. COULD
not afford to compete with those of other countries
that had a govern, uh, a capitalism evolving into
socialism. Well, the, the whole basis of classical political
economy from Adam Smith, John Stuart Mill, Marx, and
the whole rest of the 19th century was based
on a value theory, uh, this isolating. Economic rent
is unearned income. The whole political fight of the
19th century from Britain, France, all over Europe was
uh to prevent uh the landlord class from controlling
the economy and protecting itself, increasing food prices, uh,
and, uh, obtaining higher and higher land rent that
would raise the cost of living. And make labor
unemployable by industrialists and David Ricardo in his principles
of Political Economy in 1817 and explained how if
you don't reform parliament and take away the land.
Lord's ability to control the economy, then uh and
adopt free trade so that uh Britain could import
its food at a low enough price to keep
British wages low, so that, uh, industrialists could compete.
Well, then you, you'd uh uh have uh profits
being stifled. By the rent recipient. So all of
Europe said we've got to get rid of the
aristocracy and it's, it's charges like a, a tax,
and we have, and uh that was the fight.
Well, the uh the not only the landlords fought
back, but uh there were monopolies that were created
under feudalism. Largely by the financial class of bankers
that helped kings create uh monopolies of foreign trade
and er other er basic uh privileges, special privileges
that er would give them the income to pay
the war debts er that they ran ran up.
Well, the Austrians wanted to keep the protect the
monopolies, Protect the landowners and especially to protect the
bankers. Uh, uh, THEY wanted to protect every form
of economic rent that Adam Smith and the classical
economists opposed, the land rent, monopoly rent, and interest
charges. And so they, uh, they tried to create
a narrative that denied and erased the entire Origins
of economic origins of civilization. They said government can
only be negative. Government and public institutions, palaces, temples
have no productive role to play, and in fact,
from the very beginning, economics took off purely by
merchants and private enterprise, by greedy people that wanted
to make money. Uh, BY exploiting other people, and
fortunately they were able to exploit other people and
amass huge fortunes, and that's what's helped civilization grow.
This was the Austrian attack on civilization and uh
the that attack that in America, you had exactly
the same anti-classical reaction by uh JB Clark here,
my uh. In my economic books, I've described this,
uh, uh, in, in various books, uh, Killing the
Host especially. Well, uh, the The rontiers, that, uh,
rent, the landlords and bankers fought back and they,
uh, subsidized universities and they actually have Erased the
entire economic theory of the free market economists of
the 19th century. That's not in the United States,
there's no longer the history of economic thought being
taught in the standard economic curriculum, and there's no
economic history being taught. At least when I went
to school in the 1960s for my PhD in
economics, there were courses like this. They've all been
replaced simply by mathematics courses or uh by everything
except economic history because according to if uh the
economic model, civilization could not have taken off. It
could not have originated. Civilization. WOULD have been impossible
unless it followed today's rules that very quickly would
have stifled its growth immediately. It would have turned
into the decline of the Roman Empire in the
1st 50 years of its existence, uh, basically. Uh,
AND so, uh, basically I, I stopped uh having
much interest in Today's economic, uh, orthodoxy because, uh,
I, I got much, I became an economic historian
and uh uh the and archaeologist and anthropologist, uh,
all of the anthropology studies show that uh uh
surviving small local communities. HAVE not tried to encourage
wealth accumulation because if you're a low surplus economy,
like the Stone Age and the Bronze Age were,
you cannot afford large fortunes from being accumulated except
at the expense of other people. And if they're
accumulated at the expense of society as a whole,
then the uh emerging oligarchy, the wealthy class, the
1% obtaining these fortunes would have prevented the economy
from taking off. And so, uh, the Bronze Age
succeeded in doing something that modern democracies and Western
civilization has not been able to do, and that
is to prevent the development of an oligarchy and
specifically a financial and land owning oligarchy from impoverishing
society. And uh deindustrializing it and uh and uh
stifling economic growth to a halt. That was its
great contribution and that's why economists uh just uh
exclude any thought of this economic history. From the,
from their curriculum and uh the Assyriologists and Egyptologists
and other scholars who were members of my Harvard
group uh basically are have no interest in talking
to economists and at first they were Uh, hesitant
to have, uh, me and, uh, organizing, uh, the
whole set of colloquia that we had, but they,
they thought that I, they worried. That I was
going to try to impose modern economic ideas on
them, and I said just the opposite. I want
to find out how it was that these societies
were able to start by canceling the debts, by
redistributing the land, by distributing land in the first
place, by creating a monetary system in which debts
were denominated in the first place, and uh how,
how did this whole structure develop and What made
Western civilization so different in after around the 8th
century BC?
And in regards to imposing modern concepts or modern
ways of thinking in on onto ancient civilizations, earlier
you talked about the role of temples and palaces
in the ancient Near East. Were such institutions public?
Does the private public dichotomy work when talking about
the institutions in the Bronze Age Near East?
Uh, ARE you tell me again how you're, uh,
explain it in different words, the dichotomy, uh, you
mean the, uh, there, there were two sectors together.
For instance, many people thought that Hammurabi's laws were
a tax code. They weren't a tax code because
it, uh, the, uh, community on the land had
its own common law. Uh, BUT Hammurabi would have,
uh, rules like an eye for an eye for
the tooth and the tooth. Well, was that really
a law? We have many legal cases in, uh,
cuneiform documents on clay. Uh, WHERE there were injuries
by, uh, one person against others, and in no
case was, uh, there a retaliation in kind for
the injury. There was a fine, just as in
Indo-European societies there was V guilt type of fines.
So if you cause an injury you had to
pay. Well then, why, and it turns out this
was not only medieval European, it was how The
whole world worked, uh, uh, certainly it's how the
Near Eastern world worked. So how do you explain,
uh, Hammurabi's laws? Well, they were specifically related to
the palace economy and the temples in its relation
to the rest of the economy, and in the
palace economy, The, the uh uh uh employees of
it were dependents. They were people that you, today
you would call them welfare uh workers. Well, if
you're on welfare, you don't have any money to
pay the fine to compensate the person who you've
injured by poking out his eye or breaking an
arm, uh, or, or killing him. Uh, SO that,
uh, Hammurabi, uh, had that principle as saying, well,
if they don't have any money, then there's no
choice but to, uh, retaliate. Uh, GRADUALLY there was
a reinterpretation. OF Hammurabi's laws and the laws of
all the rulers. The laws were uh basically for
relations between the palace and the, the self-sufficient economy
on the land. Uh, AND it, it was the
palace that essentially, uh, took the grain surplus, uh,
that was provided, uh, I, I won't say in
taxes, but in the various forms of payments, including
the advance of sharecropping land, the rents that they
owed, the various service payments they owed to the
government, uh, that were settled in, in grain money.
The, the, they use this to Support uh an
institutional labor force to make the exports to uh
obtain the uh foreign raw materials including silver. That
was valued apparently because of its use in religious,
uh, uh for religion as a, a sanctified metal,
which is why the, uh, the, the temples were
the key of providing, uh, silver. I think one
of your questions. WAS, uh, no, why, uh, how,
how was, how the money produced? Well, and the
Austrians said, you know, the the governments, uh, degrade
money, you know, they run deficits and uh they
spend much and they destroy money. Well, actually, it
was the private sector that destroyed money. Uh, ACCORDING
to Menger, well, the merchants would just, uh, uh,
you know, provide gold and they would, er silver,
mainly. They would take the silver and they would,
you're you're going to buy some food at the
market, you pay a little silver uh in exchange
for things as if cash on the barrel header
right away, and nobody asked, well, who makes the
silver? Well, we know not only from the Bible,
but from similar Babylonian wisdom literature, that there was
a condemnation of merchants for cheating, and not only
Degrading the silver they used at less than uh
the standardized purity, and the temples would stamp the
purity uh on, you know, various uh uh sheets
that they had, uh, but also divide them into
specific weights and measures. You can't just take, you
know, here's a piece of raw silver, Hach gilt,
uh, as it's called in, uh, uh, in German.
The silver was, you would have bracelets that were
divided into 55 shekel little pieces, uh, that you
could break off. There were standardized measures, and you
also had scales. Well, again, you have the Babylonians,
like the biblical, uh, the Old Testament, uh, complaining
about merchants with false scales. They would use, uh,
One wait for buying and selling, uh, for buying
goods, and another way for selling goods to cheat,
to cheat the customers. Um, uh, PRIVATE merchants were
always known for cheating throughout history, not only in
modern times. Uh, SO you, you, you needed the
temples to provide honest money, and that's why most
of the marketplaces down through the Athenian agora, for
instance, were held in the uh open space in
front of the temple. So if there was any
uh argument, the uh Athenians had the agora nomoi,
uh, the enforcers of uh uh law and uh
and weights and measures in, uh, in the agora.
Oversee, yeah, fair dealing. You needed the government to
regulate crooked, greedy merchants. Well, the Austrians said, wait
a minute, you don't want to regulate greed, greed
is good. Greed is what drives things. We're the
greedy people, we're the good people, not the bad
people, we're what drives civilization. Our greed is not
you people who we exploit, you're just there to
be. Exploited. We provide the surface, the surplus by
extracting interest from you, land rent, and monopoly rent
to exploit you. We are the drivers of civilization.
That's Austrian and free enterprise theory as opposed to
uh classical uh industrial capitalism that said we cannot
afford this kind of behavior. And have a stable
industrial competitive economy. That's why industrial capitalism was to
the Austrians evolving into socialism and had to be
fought against, which is what you have today with
the free, the free enterprise boys and the libertarians
uh uh deindustrializing the US and European economies.
And regarding that, regarding the Austrian school and the
libertarians, has a free market ever existed?
Well, the, the question is, ha ha, trick question.
What is a free market? To uh Adam Smith,
John Stuart Mill, the, the entire classical uh value
and rent theory century, a free market was a
market free from economic rent. It was free from
unearned income. Everyone was supposed to earn their income
by playing a productive role. Uh, AND that is
why they wanted to end the special privileges of
the landlord class, of the monopoly class, and ultimately,
the privilege of money and credit, money creation and
credit allocation by the banks. So, uh, the, their
kind of free market was free from, uh, parasitism,
from Unearned income. For today, the free market is
free for parasitism, for rent seeking, for deregulation. It
is free from government regulation to prevent the concentration
of wealth, not by playing a productive role in
uh. Bu il ding factories and employing labor to
produce industrial goods, but in being a rontier, uh,
a, a rent collector, either as a landlord, as
a monopolist, or a banker, so the whole concept
of a free market has been turned upside down
from how it originated. In the classical economy. So
when you say, was there a free market, any
market is structured, any market has to have a
structure and regulation or it becomes anarchy and there's
not a market, real market anymore. It's just uh
everybody do whatever you can and it's a war
of all against all.
So in regards to the ancient Near East, tell
us about how urbanization occurred there. I mean, in
the book you go through how ritual centers developed
as gathering places or trading venues and how cities
then emerged in the modern sense of the term.
Tell us about that.
Well, what I, I, uh, uh, at Harvard, I
worked very closely with Alex Marshak, uh, the great
ice age archaeologist who wrote The Roots of Civilization.
And uh he, he found already in the ice
age, many of the social structures that uh survived
through uh the Stone Age, Bronze Age, and the
modern times, uh had uh had their origins. And
uh what he found was already in the Magdalenian
period, 14th millennium BC. You had uh people, uh
the land was not very densely populated, and you
would have clans and tribal organizations of clans, uh,
growing and expanding, but they'd have to get together,
uh, once, once a year or twice a year
or quarterly, uh, one time or another, they were
a clindrical times for them to get together. So
one of the roles Of the chieftains was to
keep the calendar, so, and it was a lunar
solar calendar, so that they would know, OK, we
follow when the moon is full or uh new
or whenever, we will get together at a given
spot, or where do you get together? Well, most
of the caves where we have archaeological evidence of
ice age gatherings were uh uh on Watercourses, uh,
or if not watercourses on, uh, roads or paths
that were intersection easy to get to, transport easy
to so that people could join in these consolidations
of identity, and these occasions were, I won't say
markets, uh, because everybody was uh self-supporting at that
time, uh, but they were Uh, uh, where, uh,
marriage and, uh, marriages or whatever you would call
them, uh, would take place, where intercourse of various
forms, uh, would take place, and, uh, that, uh,
then after you would have this consolidation of a
tribal or, uh, other identity, then people would go
back to their hunting and gathering, uh, for, and
so, These. GATHERING places were marked. Cosmologically, the whole
idea was to make a gathering place, a, a,
an image of the cosmos. Well, that's what you
had in Stonehenge, and there were many similar uh
uh uh uh places uh er uh such as
Stonehenge where you would have them aligned with the
year on a particular solstice or equinox where the
sun would come and Trace a particular time and
that was, uh, that was showed, OK, this marks
the time of the year that we are uh
developing. Well, just like Stonehenge was sort of, uh,
a scale model of a, an annual calendar, cities
themselves became based as a cosmological model. They had
uh typically 4 gates. Like the seasons, sometimes 12
gates, uh, they, uh they, they either would be
round or you would, you would have the, uh,
if not north, south, east, west orientation, then you'd
have it oriented to the way the winds went,
you would have standardized, uh, plots and, and streets,
uh, you, you, you would, uh, you had a
cosmological context for Urban design and architecture and development
just like churches as they developed or cosmological, the
medieval European churches uh had all of this cosmological
mathematics uh worked into uh their design, that all
of this is to say, the order that we
are creating on Earth is as stable as the
astronomical. ORDER in the cosmos, and that's why there
have been so many studies of astral religion in
the sense that cosmology was the basis for archaic
religion as an attempt to create a system of
economic order, or I should say a model of
economic order on earth as it is in heaven,
and they wanted to create the stability. But unlike
modern economics, that says if you don't, you don't
need a government because everything returns to normal if
you just let it alone, let the rich people
impoverish the 99% and it's OK. Uh, THE, uh,
uh, ancient society until the Western civilization realized that
the economies got out of order if there weren't
intervention, and how do you restore this cosmological order
and balance where uh you have a self-sustaining peasantry
on The land growing crops, you have a uh
the temple bureaucracy, a palace bureaucracy, uh, you have
foreign trade. How do you, how do you keep
econo the economy in balance? And the whole uh
Greek philosophy was based on balance, including the theory
of medicine, for instance, the whole Aristotelian idea of
Balances within the body, you could say it's similar
for uh the uh acupuncture uh that they have
in the Near East. The whole idea of balance
was central, and also the whole idea of fair
rulership was based on keeping the population uh happy
and satisfied, so That under Confucianism, for instance, in
uh early uh early China, the rulership was the
ruler was supposed to uh keep the peasantry happy
and uh and if there was a peasant rebellion,
that meant that the ruler had not been ruling
fairly and probably deserved to be overthrown. Uh, YOU
have that whole concept of economic balance, which is
just the opposite of today's economy saying, uh, the,
the business cycle is self, self-correcting. You don't need
the government to intervene and cancel debts because everything
is balanced with checks and balances, and, uh, you
don't have to worry about debts being unpaid or
you don't have to worry that today. Civilization economic
problems exist. We, we actually don't have any problems
at all today because the problem, reality is impossible
under our economic theory. We can't possibly have Europe
and America acting like they are because our theory
says that's not possible. Well, that's the craziness of
academic economics and the social sciences generally.
So it's very interesting all of what you said
there about how some of the institutions we take
for granted nowadays have their origins in ancient Mesopotamia.
What would you say was Mesopotamia's role in innovating
and shaping civilization's basic economic institutions?
Well, the economic practices that uh became uh part
of how economies operate were originated there. For instance,
money is a means of paying debt. You have
all anthropologists have found. That all uh the surviving
indigenous communities have debts to each other, even uh
as a means of integrating people. Uh, IF you
have one family growing crops and another family growing
the same crop, they'll Uh, give, uh, give this
as a gift to the other, and there'll be
a reciprocal gift, there will be an exchange. There
was always a re re reciprocity and debt, but
the, uh, Mesopotamia achieved a large scale of, uh,
uh, of Uh, specialization of, uh, production that didn't
exist before. Now, there have been a number of
books that were just, uh, published, uh, and reviewed
in, uh, uh, the American press on Mesopotamia, and
it's just amazing how, uh, uh, how they're, they're
trying to say Mesopotamia never existed, and, and it
didn't, there was no takeoff at all. They said
what made Mesopotamia rich was it had these river
deposited so. Soils just like Egypt had the rich
soil deposited by the Nile, and here's all this
rich soil for growing crops, and they could, they
could afford to have a big population and the
population all got together and when they get together,
you're big enough to begin to specialize labor and
uh develop industry. Uh, THE question is, why did
it happen in Mesopotamia? Well, that's because, uh, these
rich soils. Didn't have metal or uh stone, or
even very uh hardwood trees, uh maybe soft palm
trees or soft trees. So they, that forced them
to trade, well uh with other countries outside of
Mesopotamia, with people who weren't Mesopotamians, like uh people
from the Indus Valley or what is now modern
Turkey, Anatolia. How are they going to do? This.
Well, there are some signs that in the 4th
millennium BC, uh, the large, uh, largest Sumerian city
of Uruk did try to make outposts, uh, in
what is now modern Turkey, uh, and they were
walled cities, and presumably you have a wall because
you don't want to be attacked, but all these
outposts disappeared from the archaeological record pretty quickly. And
it, the fact is, you, you couldn't afford to
obtain uh the raw, the raw materials, the metal,
stone and wood that you needed by force because
it was just too expensive to fight people and
get killed and have to build walls and do
that. So the way that Mesopotamia obtained its uh
uh raw materials was to have other countries volunteer.
Voluntarily either supply them or to be hosts to
Mesopotamian developers uh producing tin and copper that gave
their name to the Bronze Age, or silver or
stone or jewelry or the other, uh, everything that
could not be produced in Mesopotamia from its own
soil. So, what Mesopotamia did have because of its
soil, was a very large population uh uh that
was growing and uh the, uh this population was
large enough to be self-supporting and to support an
export, a labor-intensive export industry, largely of handicraft. Crafts,
textiles, and other handicrafts to trade abroad for the
raw materials that it developed, so that uh uh
that it needed. So, that was a circular flow.
Well, when you advance textiles to a trader, how
are you going to get repaid? How do you
denominate it? You don't get repaid in textiles, you
had to have a standard of measurement. And the
role of money was a standard of measurement initiated
by the temples for their own account keeping. That's
why the measure of grain was divided into 60ths.
They were, uh, they had to Give grain regularly
to the um uh the labor force there. Well,
the archaic measurement of time was the lunar month.
But you, you know, the lunar month varies in
time from 26, 27 days all the way up
to 29th or 30 days. You can't just keep
giving various measures for a variable month. You had
the standardize month. So from Mesopotamia to Egypt, you
standardize the calendar on the 30 days. Months. Uh,
WELL, of course, that left uh uh uh a
gap, uh, in the year between 360-day year and
the 365 day uh solar year. Uh, AND, uh,
so you, you had a civil calendar based on,
uh, the lunar, uh, the lunation cycle, and In
a solar calendar that was used by the large
institutions for the distribution of food, and if, as
long as you divided the grain ration into uh
60ths, that is, every day for 30 days, twice
a day, you would give them barley or grain
or, you know, whatever you were feeding them. They
used the same system of denominations for coins. The
uh they were, the mina was divided into 60
shuts. Just like our minute is divided into 60
seconds. The origins of our time measurements come from
Mesopotamian, uh, measures of grain that was extended to
silver and money in general, and then the measurement
of the counting system, uh, in general. OK,
so, uh, I'm just going to ask you actually
one final question because I don't want to take
too much of your time and we've already done.
Uh, ONE hour, so, um, what do you think
then the modern Western democracies could learn from Bronze
Age economic policy that would be possible to apply
today?
Well, that's the, the big question and I discussed
that in uh my book, The Collapse of Antiquity.
What uh The Bronze Age really came to an
end in 1200 BC in the Mediterranean. Uh, THERE,
there was bad weather. The bad, the, uh, climate
crisis, uh, began in around 1800 BC in, uh,
the Indus Valley, when you had the whole, the
Indus civilization was the largest civil, uh, Bronze Age
civilization, very standardized, uh, very developed everywhere. Um. But
apparently there was a drought and the population declined
so rapidly that you had the influx of Indo-Europeans,
largely from what is now Ukraine apparently, uh, come
in there and overlayer it. Well, uh, you had
in 1600 BC, uh, there was uh bad weather
in still in uh in Uh, what's now Turkey,
you had the Hittites move in and uh to
the conquer Babylon, and the Babylonian Empire ended in
1600 BC. Well, uh, uh, you, you had a
survival of the palatial economy using syllabic syllabic writing
in Greek. Uh, IN the Mycenaean, uh, economy with
different, different Greek cities, uh, and palaces. But, uh,
here too, there was, uh, apparently a drought, uh,
we know from the ice age, uh, uh, the,
the, the Uh, ice, uh, way of, of cores
that have been dug up and from the tree,
uh, the trees and other archaeological evidence that there
was really bad, uh, disturbance in the weather, you
had populations set in motion that, uh, essentially Uh,
there, it was, uh, a, I guess they call
them intermediate periods, and, uh, you had the palatial
economy fall apart, uh, the syllabic writing fell apart,
the palace control fell apart in Greece, for instance,
uh, and you had, uh, the local Local managers
who were providing uh the tribute or the taxes
to the palace, just sort of ending up in
control of local uh areas. You had warlords, between
1200 BC and about uh 800, 750 BC uh
you, you had uh just kind of anarchy that
historians of that period uh call mafiosi states. You
had a very And, and, uh, uh, cruel centralized,
uh, uh, chieftains holding the rest of the economy
in bondage largely through debt or through control of
the land and through the, you know, kind of,
oh, it was their kind of proto, uh, serfdom.
Well, uh, they, they achieved their ability to indebt
populations because if you had uh the Phoenician and
Syrian traders expanding into the Mediterranean, Mediterranean around 800
BC to Greece to Rome. They brought these practices
of interest-bearing, charging interest, and other commercial practices, weights
and measures, uh, temple organizations, temples, uh, set up
to act as chambers of commerce. They set them
up throughout Greece and Italy. Often on offshore islands,
uh, as they had done uh uh in uh
in the Bronze Age, and they brought these concepts
of interest bearing debt to the Indo-European speaking West.
There had been no indication of interest at all,
uh, being charged by Western economies before this, so,
uh, they, uh, the chieftains were the people who
would advance land. In exchange for interest and rent,
and you had all of these economic practices that
had been developed in the ancient Near East, adopted,
but what you didn't have was this institution of
divine kingship or you didn't have a central ruler
to prevent an oligarchy from developing and impoverishing society.
And that's the characteristic of Western civilization. From the
very beginning in classical Greece and Rome, there was
no authority to prevent the uh emergence of an
oligarchy using its wealth to impoverishing, impoverishing the population
at large. So that uh what you had of
uh in, in Greece and also apparently in the
Italian cities uh were uh. But certainly in Greece,
you, you had uh members of the ruling clans
say, you know, this isn't fair. Well, especially it's
not fair if they were a secondary, distant member
of the ruling clans, and they, they, uh, they
got together and they overthrew the clan leaders. This
is very well documented in uh in uh in
the various Greek cities in and I'm blocking out
for a second. Corinth, uh uh, Corinth, uh, you
had this, you had, uh, a similar overthrow in
Sparta, where the reaction of the reformers in Sparta
under the mythical Lycurgus was, uh, we don't even
want to use money, because if you have money,
then you're going to have interest-bearing debt, you're going
to have poor people. And at the very end
of all of these, uh, revolutions of by, they're
called tyrants, and tyrants just meant the, the, the
Big ruler, I think it was uh uh taken
from uh one of the cities in Persia, uh,
that, that, that was, was used, uh, you, you
had the tyrants overthrew the mafiosi states and begin
to undertake public development. Uh, THEY, they, they, uh,
canceled the debts that had held the uh population
in bondage, they redistributed the land, they did basically
what the Near Eastern rulers. HAD done. They uh
uh said, well, we need a free population in
order to have an economy that grows and works
and is resilient, and that's why in Corinth, you
had them developing uh the port area, the docks,
and uh the foreign uh ability for foreign trade.
Uh, YOU had uh Athens, uh Sparta was sort
of a special case, uh, they didn't have so
much foreign trade, they, they conquered a neighboring Uh,
group of, uh, city and turned the population into,
uh, hilots, which are sort of quasi serfs, uh,
and this was, the, it was the tyrants that
set The train for what became Greek democracy um
in Athens and other countries, and that just meant
uh the public, uh, the uh public sector taking
the lead in sponsoring construction projects, trade, and organizing
a uh rules of commerce and exchange and uh
economic stability, uh, sponsored. By the governments, um, in
general. Well, by Aristotle's time, uh, you had, uh,
the increase in wealth, uh, you, you, you had
the technology, had obviously by the 4th century, 5th
century, 3rd century BC, uh, developed way beyond what
it was 3000 years earlier, Society had been rich
enough to Be able to afford a wealthy class
accumulating wealth and uh not only Aristotle, but Greek
philosophers, uh Socrates, uh, the Greek religion, uh Delos
and Delphi all described the phenomenon of wealth addiction.
You have a problem when you have big fortunes
beginning to be accumulated. You have wealth, addiction and
greed, and that er er developed into an oligarchy.
So when Aristotle wrote his study of constitutions throughout
Greece and its islands and other areas, he said
almost all these constitutions call themselves democracies, but they're
really oligarchies. And Western civilization has not really had
a democracy. It's uh it occurred very quickly into
oligarchy. Well, uh, the, uh, both Aristotle and, uh,
Plato described, there was a kind of, uh, cycle
throughout history. Uh, DEMOCRACY would develop into an oligarchy,
and then, uh, some oligarchs would fight other oligarchs
by taking the public, the, the infantry, the masses
into their camp and overthrow them and making democracy
and then that would develop into an oligarchy again
and that was. The eternal return of uh Western
civilization, but uh there weren't that many cycles when
oligarchy turned in, when uh democracy turned into oligarchy,
uh, it happened rather fast. I could, I could
go into Roman history if you want, but I
describe all of this in the collapse of antiquity.
So Western civilization, uh, developed the, it took the
economic practices that had Been developed in the Near
East but without any ruler to uh prevent a
domestic oligarchy from developing and impoverishing society and reducing
it to serfdom of the type that uh Roman
that Rome did with its empire collapsing into serfdom,
and we're having that same oligarchic tendency uh today,
and the oligarchies. In all countries became a rent-seeking
class, a rentier class, uh, at first by their
land ownership in conjunction with their creditor power of
interest. So, you had rent in the form of
land ownership, rent in the form of interest, and,
uh, uh, later monopoly privileges. This is what John
Stuart Mill called, uh, making rents, rental income in
your sleep. You don't work for it, but you
achieve a political and military power to extract rent
from the civilization at large, and that's where classical
economics came in in the 19th century. The whole
ethic of industrial capitalism was trying to restore the
economic balance that had been missing from uh Western
civilization. Ever since its inception in Greece and Rome,
you know, after the 8th century BC, and, uh,
it, it seemed to be on its way to
evolving into socialism uh by World War 1, but
by that time the Rontiers fought back uh and
achieved uh uh regained control of the economy uh
at the expense of uh industrial capitalism by The
rent extractors by the landlords in conjunction with the
financial class of bankers, and that's the same ethic,
the same uh class, Renttier class that's stifling economies
today from Europe to the United Nations, uh, to
the United States. IS exactly what uh the Mesopotamia,
Egypt, and other Bronze Age uh economies were able
to prevent by having a central rulership, and that's
why the Austrian school in economic liberty, free markets
today said we don't want any Central rulership, any
government able to regulate the economy or to prevent
exploitation, or to discourage economic rent in favor of
earned income by profits and wages, you want to
shift taxes off, off banking, off real estate, on
to labor and industry, and that is exactly what's
Polarizing the European and uh uh US economies today.
I didn't expect this to be the result of
what I was going to find when I began
to look in Mesopotamia for, well, how did they
happen to cancel the debts, but in reconstruction, the
whole society that I was responsible for doing this,
I, I realized what that there are really two
kinds of societies, a regulated society to prevent exploitation
and rent seeking and a free for all where
the rontiers take over and and impoverish the population.
Yes, that is really fascinating, Dr. Hertzen, and we've
already recorded almost 75 minutes, so I think this
is a good point to wrap up our conversation.
I don't want to take too much of your
time, as I said, and the book is again
Temples of Enterprise Creating Economic Order in. The Bronze
Age Near East, and I'm leaving a link to
it in the description of the interview. And Doctor
Hudson, thank you so much for taking the time
to come on the show again. It's always really
fascinating to talk.
Well, I look forward to seeing the transcript of
all this because I always get new ideas while
talking to you, Ricardo. Uh, I mean, your questions
sort of lead me to, uh, develop a different
exposition, so I'm looking forward to it.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inasi Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoro, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka, Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Eddin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolatti, Gabriel P Scortez
or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith,
and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Ebert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank, Lucas
Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al
Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.